---
layout: post
title: Changing Careers
date: {}
categories:
  - ''
published: true
---
Yes, I am pursuing a career change.

I have thought about this for so long. I just didn't know what I wanted to do.

Here's some background. I graduated NYU Polytechnic School of Engineering in 2015 with a B.S. in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering. I went on to work in construction project management, and I have been in the same place for 2 years now. It's not my ideal spot, but it's a job and pays. It's definitely not what I set out to do when I went to school, but to be honest, I didn't really have a plan. My "plan" has changed continuously from my school years until now.

I remember when someone first mentioned to me about a bootcamp in early 2015. Apparently, his cousin went to one after graduating college and was able to found work in programming. I had absolutely no idea what it really was, and it didn't sound quite right to me.

The idea of attending a bootcamp myself never emerged until I read the book Set for Life by Scott Trench in May 2017. The book is about financial independence (FI), a subject matter that I was already pretty deep into at that point. Unlike most content about FI though, this book stressed the importance of increasing one's income to get to FI and specifically mentioned coding bootcamps as a suggestion for changing careers. When I got up to that part of the book, I immediately put it down and started doing research.

If you know me, you'll know that I am very obsessive and will research the shit out of something once I get interested.

First thing I did was to search something like "best coding bootcamps." I went through most of the top ranked schools and looked at the reviews for each of them. After I narrowed the location of these schools to where I live, I began finding ways to visit the schools in NYC personally. I went on Meetup and Eventbrite to find various tours and workshops and info sessions. After all this research, I finally decided on Fullstack Academy.

Okay, there's one thing about Fullstack Academy that automatically separates it from the rest. It has a part-time program. Since I'm heavily pursuing FI, that makes it hard for me to drop 3 months of employment and most likely even more time for job search. I went back and forth on doing full-time and part-time for so long, even after I decided on Fullstack Academy. The only real reason why I wanted to do full-time was that I wanted to have 110% dedication to the coursework and becoming the best developer I can be. I eventually decided that losing the financial security wasn't worth it. My path to become a developer would be 2.5 months longer, but I'd have a paycheck coming in throughout the whole program and afterward when I'm trying to get a new job.

However, that was not the only reason I chose Fullstack Academy. In fact, I most likely would have chose it even if I was doing full-time. I wanted a school with a proven track record, so that meant a few years under its belt of teaching and guiding students to go onto become developers. That narrowed the pool down to options like Fullstack Academy, App Academy, Hack Reactor, Flatiron School, and Dev Bootcamp. All of these were started in 2012 and some of the original bootcamps. A long history also means years of graduates who could be possible connections as well as companies that have worked with the school in recruiting.

App Academy and Flatiron School both have very high reputations, but they use the languages JavaScript and Ruby in their curriculum. I wanted to focus on JavaScript, because it's pretty much the language of the Internet. There's so much to learn about the continually evolving JavaScript, and learning two languages over the course of a bootcamp program might make it tough to focus on the more important one. David Yang, the co-founder of Fullstack Academy, goes more in depth on the topic [here](https://www.fullstackacademy.com/blog/is-the-programming-language-taught-at-a-coding-bootcamp-important). He actually spoke at an info session I attended, and I loved how real he was. I read all the articles he's written, and he seems to really care about his students. You can even find him on campus. You definitely won't find that in the schools that have expanded to many different campuses around the country or even the world. This was Dev Bootcamp for example, and I personally think that led to their closing. They may have been the first bootcamp, but according to student reviews, the quality of education seemed to have diminished over the years. If you look at the reviews for Fulltack Academy on Course Report, Switchup, Yelp, Facebook, and Google, it's almost impossible to find a negative review on the school. Unfortunately, the less than handful of not so positive reviews were for the part-time program that I'll be attending. Hopefully, I can get through the downsides of part-time and still get an amazing experience. An important part of a bootcamp is finding a job after graduating. Most bootcamps have outcomes report that show what percentage of students go on to land jobs and how much they get paid. They can often inflate their numbers to reflect themselves more favorably. Fullstack Academy is one of the founding members of the Council on Integrity in Results Reporting (CIRR).