---
layout: post
title: Switched Internet Service Providers to Save Money
date: 2018-02-16
published: false
---
*-  -*

A huge part of reaching financial independence is reducing your expenses. The reasoning is twofold. You have more money to grow into even more money, and you find that you don't need as much to live. I covered most of my expenses from 2017 [here](http://marcopchen.com/2017/12/31/2017-financial-summary-part-2.html), and I wrote [here](http://marcopchen.com/2017/12/30/why-you-should-max-out-your-401k.html) on how important saving to invest is.

Recurring expenses are the easiest way to deplete your piggy bank without you realizing it. I really recommend looking at your monthly bank account or credit card activity to see what charges have been sneaking up on you. Is there a gym membership or movie streaming subscription you haven't really been using? Cut it. If not, find a way to reduce the cost. For example, I split Spotify Premium with friends to pay only $2.50 every month. You can do the same with most subscription services like Netflix or Amazon Prime.

One of my bigger recurring expenses has been Internet, which is almost a basic necessity these days. We have had service from Optimum in our home since April 2016 when we moved in. Like all Internet service providers do, Optimum gives the first year at a discount. The bill was a reasonable $44.95 per month for a download speed of 50 Mbps. They also threw in the rental for a router and a modem for free. The bill went up to $64.90 in April 2017, and the download speed was changed to 60 Mbps. I believe they stopped offering 50 Mbps at some point before then. In July 2017, Optimum started charging a modem rental fee of $5 and changed the plan to 100 Mbps speed for a total bill of $70.29. This is when they made the cheapest options for speed to be 20 Mbps and 100 Mbps. Finally, they increased our download speed to 200 Mbps and our bill to $75.29 in November 2017. At this point, I was fed up with all the increases in price without notification and discussion. I decided to look into other options.

Thankfully, Verizon Fios was installed at our building in the past year. By the way, all my advice in this post probably doesn't apply if you don't have more than one option for Internet service where you live. I know that's an unfortunate reality for many Americans, but there's no leverage with a single provider to do much about the bill. I called up Verizon and signed up for their Internet service with a bill of originally $53.37 for 100 Mbps download speed. There was also an $100 installation fee. What I did immediately was go online to review my order to see if I could reduce that bill. First, I was able to knock off like $10 for the router rental fee. Verizon wants you to use one of their routers, but you can get away with using your own. They may end up making you agree to the rental during installation, but you can always return the router and only pay the extra $10 for the first month. That's what I had to do. I was also able to knock off $15 per month by decreasing the download speed to 50 Mbps to bring the total bill to $27.48. Keep in mind this bill is only for the first year, and there's still an installation charge of $100.

Here's where the negotiations come in. First, the final offer from Optimum before officially cancelling my service was 100 Mbps download speed for around $45 per month with a $100 gift card on top. I talked to the reps about how I had to switch to Verizon for the price, and they kept trying to get me to stay. This is the leverage that comes with having more than one Internet service provider where I live. Since Optimum only offers 100 Mbps and 20 Mbps now as the cheapest options for speed, there's not much leeway there. There's only so low that they can offer for 100 Mbps, so there's not as much leeway as with Verizon. I did my research online and found that 50 Mbps should be enough for my parents and I. We started on 50 Mbps originally with Optimum, and we never noticed a difference after the subsequent download speed increases. In fact, I never knew that Optimum changed the service until I finally looked into why my bill kept going up.
